Releasing strategy (#26)
comit-network/spikes: 0010-release-strategy.adoc

= Release Strategy
Franck Royer <franck@coblox.tech>;
:toc:
:revdate: 2019-07-29

NOTE: Author: {authors} +
Date: {revdate} +
Tracking issue: https://github.com/comit-network/comit-rs/issues/1050[#1050]

== Context

> [Short description of the context]

Reviewer: Add context or remove section?

Reviewer: Maybe a link to semantic versioning could go here in context

https://semver.org/

Author: Oopsies, how did I miss that when proofreading?

If we were to version every subcrate, then we would need to come up with a strategy (Similar to https://github.com/testcontainers/testcontainers-rs/blob/master/RELEASING.md) to know how:

- What is the semantic version of the sub-crates
- How is tied to the semantic version of the meta crate comit-rs

Currently comit-rs only make sense in its whole:

- We do not want to consider a user that would only use a subcrate of comit-rs (ie, btsieve) at this stage.
- If a crate makes sense by itself and should be extracted as its own crate (or contributed to an existing crate), then this should happen first before considering users of such crate

=== Recommendation

Coming up with a meta releasing strategy is added worked with little added value.
Users do not import the sub-crates and use them (in comparison with test-containers) and only use comit-rs as a binary.

For these reasons, I recommend to keep all sub-crate at 0.1.0 and only increase the meta crate version as a whole.

== Release Trigger Guidelines - Recommendation

This is an attempt to consider and review what could be the reason to trigger a release.
Inline is the author's recommendation

[cols="1,1,1,2"]
|===

> | Repo (comit-?)| Description | Triggers a release? | Reason

Reviewer: It would be nice to have a column here stating which digit of X.Y.Z gets bumped.

Author: It's in the following section.

| i/rs | Security bug fix | Yes | We don't want users to lose funds
| i/rs | Feature that resolves a quaterly KR | Yes | Mark the achievement and consider it done

> | i/rs | Code refactoring | No | Does not bring value to the user

Reviewer: According to cargo docs (quoted below) this may trigger a release if its a 'breaking change' which a refactor can be in Rust i.e. refactoring enum variants.

> In Rust, breaking changes include adding fields to structs or variants to enums.

Author: Yes for libraries but this is a binary nobody is supposed to use our enums.
Your comment will be true once there is a `comit` library but it's out of the scope of this spike.

[cols="1,1,1,1,2"]
|===
| repo (comit-?) | Change | Pre-1.0.0 | Post-1.0.0 | Comment

| i/rs | Security bug fix | Patch | Patch | As per standard guidelines
| i/rs | Feature that resolves a quaterly KR | Minor | Minor | Except if it fits in another category
| i/rs | UX Feature | Minor | Major/Minor | Team decides depending how ground-breaking the feature is, e.g, how much users will have to re-learn to use COMIT
| i/rs | Breaking HTTP API Change | Minor | Major | If someone were to create a client on cnd, they need to know that they can upgrade minor versions without risk
| i | Adapt to comit-rs HTTP API Change | Minor | Major |
| rs | Breaking COMIT API Change | Minor | Major | To express non-backward compatibility between two cnd
| rs | Breaking CLI API | Minor | Major | While this is unlikely to happen, you don't want user to discover that their systemd scripts are broken by surprise
| rs | Embedded comit-i | Minor | Major/Minor | Depending on whether the comit-i changes fits in any other categories above

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps a row for Rust 'breaking changes' as defined in by the Cargo docs (quoted in comment above).

Author: Same than before, I don't think it applies here as it's a binary crate.

=== Validation against release build

Currently, all tests are done against the debug build, the default `cargo build`.
It could be of value to run the e2e test suite against the release build to ensure that the behaviour is as expected.

==== Recommendation

Considering that, except for tests, there are no attributes in the code base that implement a given behaviour for a specific type of build only, this could be considered redundant.
Hence, I would suggest we do not include this to the pre-release validation.

=== Validation against non-Linux build

Currently, the CI is ran against a Linux environment.
However, we aim to support both Mac OS and Linux platform.

https://github.com/comit-network/comit-rs/issues/925[In the past], there has been issues specific to Mac due the difference on the network layer.

==== Recommendation

Due the fact that we encountered issues in the past, I would recommend that we include a full run (Rust tests and e2e tests) on a Mac OS platform before proceeding with a release.

=== Validation of embedded comit-i compatibility

The comit-i CI run is done against stubs of the cnd HTTP API.

> Hence, it does not provides any guarantee that comit-i is fully compatible with any version of cnd (master or otherwise).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence, it does not provide any guarantee that comit-i is fully compatible with any version of cnd (master or otherwise).
```

It would also force us to use our software and iron out/notice any UX issue with it.

The test could also be automated by slightly changing our e2e tests and using testnet nodes instead of regtest/dev nodes as part of the pre-release validation.

==== Recommendation

While it would be interesting to be able to run the end-to-end tests against testnet/dev nodes, I think that there is a number of other advantage to run this manually: confirm comit-i compatibility and test our UX.

Hence, I recommend we do a testnet swap using comit-i.
Knowing that it should not be too hard if we just used our testnet bobtimus (and connect to the same testnet nodes).
The test should be exhaustive enough to cover all existing assets (e.g, ETH->BTC and BTC->ERC20 is enough) for both redeem and refund.

Ideally, we should rotate (one release we do ETH->BTC, BTC->ERC20 and the next time BTC-ETH, ERC20->BTC).

The release candidate should be used on bobtimus side.
At this stage, I would not consider necessary to test the release candidate with the previous release. This could be reviewed post-1.0.0.

=== Stabilisation strategy

> By Stabilisation I mean, wwhat should we do if we found a bug as part of the validation process? We could agree now on a rule of thumb on how to deal with such bug:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By Stabilisation I mean, what should we do if we found a bug as part of the validation process? We could agree now on a rule of thumb on how to deal with such bug:
```

This means that we need to version our releases and because we like to put thoughts into things, here's a spike about it.

== Scope

Scope:

* comit-rs repo (cnd and btsieve)
* comit-i repo

Out of scope:

* Maintenance window/versions that are supported
* What would happen if btsieve/cnd became libraries

== Considerations

* [x] Versioning phases
** [x] No phase, start at 1.0.0 and increment from there
** [x] Two phases versioning: Alpha/Beta then stable (start at 0.1.0, Keep 0.Y.Z until considered stable and it becomes 1.0.0)
* [x] Metacrate
** [x] Whether or not to version crates in comit-rs (cnd, btsieve, etc)
* [x] What triggers a release publication? e.g.:
** [x] Time frequency (monthly, etc)
** [x] Major feature (OKR achievement, accumulation of features)
** [x] Breaking change (on http api, comit api, CLI interface, internal API such as btsieve http api)
** [x] Bug fixed (all bugs, only security bugs)
** [x] Embed new comit-i version
* [x] When to increment the major/minor/patch number e.g.:
** [x] COMIT protocol breaking change
** [x] HTTP API breaking change
** [x] Embedded comit-i version upgrade
** [x] security bugs
** [x] "major features"

> * [x]  What validation should be do before releasing? e.g.:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [x]  What validation should be done before releasing? e.g.:
```

== Phasing

By phasing I mean having a different version schema now versus later.
The Rust practice is to have pre-1.0.0 (0.Y.Z) and post 1.0.0 (X.Y.Z).

If we were to adopt phasing then it would make sense to follow the Rust practice.

There is a strong organic milestone that COMIT software hasn't yet reached: the green light to use it on mainnet.
This _green light_ comes with a number of assumptions: recovery is possible and easy, bugs are ironed out, no known security issues, etc.
We, CoBloX, know that COMIT is not ready for mainnet and what needs to be done to make it ready.

Hence, it would make sense to keep versions at 0.Y.Z until we consider the software ready for mainnet.
Once ready, this version would be flagged 1.0.0

=== Recommendation

Use 0.Y.Z versions now, starting at 0.1.0 as per Rust convention.

Release 1.0.0 once we consider COMIT mainnet ready.

== When is mainnet ready? - Recommendation

The previous <<Phasing,Recommendation>> suggest that we should move to 1.0.0 once comit-rs is mainnet ready.

While I do not think this document should dictate when we must consider comit-rs _mainnet ready_, I thought it would feel incomplete if it were not mentioned at all.

> The team consensus seems to be that comit-rs is mainnet ready once this it becomes _unlikely_ that a user would lose funds using it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The team consensus seems to be that comit-rs is mainnet ready once it becomes _unlikely_ that a user would lose funds using it.
```

I would define _unlikely_ by saying that:

____
We are not aware of any issue that would lead a user to lose their funds and have taken a number of steps (tests, recovery strategy) to ensure that what we don't know cannot lead to fund loss.
____

== Release trigger Comparison

There are 2 common strategies to release:

1. Time-bound: Release every X weeks/months/quarter
2. Feature driven: Release once a number of interesting features are ready and stable
3. Hybrid (based on https://github.com/comit-network/spikes/pull/26#issuecomment-516635115[Tobin's comment]): Each PR that implements a feature worth release bumps the version number as it should (as per 2.).

> However, binary/GitHub releases is only done on a pre-defined frequence (as per 1.).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, binary/GitHub releases are only done on a pre-defined frequency (as per 1.).
```

-  The time-based frequency make it so that it could be bad timing (middle of a big change) meaning that we would need to decide whether we tag (and validate) an older or postpone the release
|===

=== Recommendation

Considering the current status of our software, the fact that we are pre-mainnet with scarce users, the release process should not be an added burden that creates overhead.
For this reason, I recommend that we release feature based.
In <<Release Trigger Guidelines - Recommendation>>, let's review what could be the _rule of thumbs_ of when to release.

== Handle multi-crate version-ing (comit-rs only)

The comit-rs repo contains a number of crates:

- cnd
- btsieve
- vendors/*

The Rust dependency graph looks like that:

----
cnd -> vendors <- btsieve
----

The functional (due to REST APIs) dependency graph looks like that:
----
cnd -> vendors
  \       ^
   \      |
    \-> btsieve
----

Which means that:

* a breaking REST API change in btsieve involves updating cnd
* a breaking lib API change in vendors involves updating cnd and/or btsieve

> 1. If we were to version every crate, then we would need to come up with a strategy (Similar to https://github.com/testcontainers/testcontainers-rs/blob/master/RELEASING.md) to know how:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If we were to version every crate, then we would need to come up with a strategy (Similar to https://github.com/testcontainers/testcontainers-rs/blob/master/RELEASING.md) to know:
```

** What is the semantic version of the sub-crates;

> ** How is tied to the semantic version of the meta crate comit-rs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
** How the crate version is tied to the semantic version of the meta crate comit-rs.
```
Correct?

> 2. If we only consider comit-rs has a whole:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. If we only consider comit-rs as a whole:
```

> ** We would not need to worry about managing dependency between crates (e.g, ensuring that users use cnd version 0.5.0 with btsieve 0.6.0 or above);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
** We would not need to worry about managing dependencies between crates (e.g, ensuring that users use cnd version 0.5.0 with btsieve 0.6.0 or above);
```

> ** vendor crates that make sense own their own can have their own version once they are in their own repo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
** vendor crates that make sense on their own can have their own version once they are in their own repo.
```

3. If we were to not version vendor crate but only version cnd and btsieve crates:
** Not as complex as versioning all crates;
** Still a bit awkward around releasing comit-rs: we would actually release cnd or btsieve that would have their own version or tags;
** We would end up releasing a version of btsieve that does not have a compatible cnd yet (if we break the http API);
The positive effect is that we would not need to wait for a change to be in cnd to release it (and consider it done) in btsieve.

> ** We may consider doing version check-ing as part of cnd start up by ending an endpoint on btsieve side that expose the version and checking at cnd start that a compatible version of btsieve is used;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
** We may consider doing version checking as part of cnd start-up by adding an endpoint to btsieve that exposes the version and checking at cnd start that a compatible version of btsieve is used;
```

** We may consider attaching a compatible btsieve binary at each cnd release (and this could even be automated based on the previous point)

=== Recommendation

Coming up with a releasing strategy that takes all crates (including vendor) in consideration is added work with little added value.
Users do not import the sub-crates and use them (in comparison with test-containers) and only use comit-rs as two binaries.

> After reconsideration, strategy 3 may provide the best of both world: a versioning system that makes sense (each binary as it's own version) and a lightweight to still manage dependency across versions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After reconsideration, strategy 3 may provide the best of both world: a versioning system that makes sense (each binary has it's own version) and a lightweight solution to still manage dependency across versions.
```

> For strategy 3., if btsieve were to because a library used by cnd, then we would only need to continue cnd versioning as it is and stop binary release for btsieve that can continue its own version path in its own repo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For strategy 3., if btsieve were to become a library used by cnd, then we would only need to continue cnd versioning as it is and stop binary release for btsieve that can continue its own version path in its own repo.
```

> Hence, I recommend strategy 3: version cnd and btsieve separately and keen vendor crates at 0.1.0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Hence, I recommend strategy 3: version cnd and btsieve separately and keep vendor crates at 0.1.0.
```

== Release Trigger Guidelines - Recommendation

This is an attempt to consider and review what could be the reason to trigger a release.
Inline is the author's recommendation

[[table-anchor-1]]
.What should trigger a release
[cols="1,1,1,2"]
|===
| Repo (comit-?)| Description | Triggers a release? | Reason

> | i/rs | Security bug fix | Yes | We don't want users to lose funds

Reviewer 2: ❓ How shall we deal with other bugs? Would any other bug fix (not security related) just be released with the next feature?

Author: Yep, if it's not in the list, it's not worth a new release.

| i/rs | Feature that resolves a quaterly KR | Yes | Mark the achievement and consider it done
| i/rs | Code refactoring | No | Does not bring value to the user
| rs | Rust API breaking change | No | This is a binary crate hence nobody is supposed to use our Rust API
| i/rs | Test improvement | No | Does not bring value to the user
| i/rs | UX Feature | Yes | As it bring value to the user
| rs | Breaking HTTP API Change | Yes | To force us to (hopefully) align the embedded comit-i as part of the release validation process
| i | Adapt to comit-rs HTTP API Change | Yes | To make it easier to work on comit-rs with the embedded comit-i
| rs | Breaking COMIT API Change | Yes | To migrate the "network" to the latest API fast and reduce the number of user using a deprecated API; To be able to easily differentiate both protocols
| rs | Internal API (btsieve REST API) | No | Does not bring value to the user

> | rs | CLI API | Depends | Whether it fits under the _UX Feature_ category

Reviewer 2: ❓ What is meant by `CLI API`?

Author: the command line. ie, `--config`

The list below only contains elements from section <<Release Trigger Guidelines - Recommendation>> (because you don't need to increment the version if you don't do a release for such change).

[cols="1,1,1,1,2"]
|===
| repo (comit-?) | Change | Pre-1.0.0 | Post-1.0.0 | Comment

| i/rs | Security bug fix | Patch | Patch | As per standard guidelines
| i/rs | Feature that resolves a quaterly KR | Minor | Minor | Except if it fits in another category
| i/rs | UX Feature | Minor | Major/Minor | Team decides depending how ground-breaking the feature is, e.g, how much users will have to re-learn to use COMIT
| i/rs | Breaking HTTP API Change | Minor | Major | If someone were to create a client on cnd, they need to know that they can upgrade minor versions without risk
| i | Adapt to comit-rs HTTP API Change | Minor | Major |
| rs | Breaking COMIT API Change | Minor | Major | To express non-backward compatibility between two cnd
| rs | Breaking CLI API | Minor | Major | While this is unlikely to happen, you don't want user to discover that their systemd scripts are broken by surprise

> | rs | Embedded comit-i | Minor | Major/Minor | Depending on whether the comit-i changes fits in any other categories above

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| rs | Embedded comit-i | Minor | Major/Minor | Depending on whether the comit-i change fits in any other categories above
```

Author: I think plural is fine.

If any of the steps were to fail then a decision would need to be made: release anyway, fix urgently, or fix non-urgently.

We will review a number of validation steps that could be added and then review what strategy should be employed if we do decide to have validation steps.

I was not able to come up with extra validation steps for comit-i so everything below is for comit-rs.

To help understanding the validation steps, below is a summary of what is already validated by the CI before each PR merge.

Conditions:

* CI is run against the PR branch (not against the branch merged in master, so master could still fail)
* CI is run on Linux environment

Steps:

* Rust format check
* Cargo.toml format check
* Rust compilation
* Rust linter (clippy)
* e2e Typescript format
* e2e Typescript check
* Rust tests on debug build
* e2e tests on debug build

Note that some validation could be make conditional on what is bumped (ie, only do such or such validation for major version increment).
At this stage, I do not recommend to do any conditional validation and hence do not mention it in my recommendations.

=== Run CI on master

> Currently, Circle CI only runs the tests on the branch to merge and not on the branch merged against master.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, Circle CI only runs the tests on the branch to merge and not on the resulting branch (usually master) after the merge.
```

Author: I am not sure the new sentence is clearer.

Which means that we could end up with a broken build on  master

==== Recommendation

> Due to the reason above, a CI run on master should be done before releasing.

Reviewer 3: CI already runs for master but only after a branch is merged.

| Does not provide all guarantees
|===

==== Recommendation

This is a difficult one that would need a team discussion in any case.
I think we should look into 5. as a first step, this should help avoid most bugs.
Once we reach a level of complexity where more validation is needed, we could review.

Please note I recommend 4. as part of the <<Testnet swap>> (contradicting myself on purpose).

=== Profiling & fuzz testing

The following performance checks could be added where a high number of swaps are being injected:

- Memory performance (& leaking but may not be applicable to Rust)
- CPU performance (ie, CPU usage)
- Speed performance: taking in account specific resources limits (disk I/O, available cpu & memory)
- Fuzz testing (of the exposed APIs being cnd HTTP and COMIT)

==== Recommendation

This topic should be discussed in a dedicated forum where we could decide whether it should be part of the PR CI or pre-release validation.
As part of this spike resolution we could open an issue and start to track it.

=== Testnet swap

Perform a testnet swap:

- With 2 or more assets, one or both directions
- With or without refund

> There has been some unexpect different of behaviour between mainnet and https://github.com/comit-network/comit-rs/issues/762[regtest] with bitcoind.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There has been some unexpected differences of behaviour between mainnet and https://github.com/comit-network/comit-rs/issues/762[regtest] with bitcoind.
```

| Do a GitHub Release
| Makes it easy to find the releases

| Hook to create binaries and attach them to GitHub Release
| Makes it easy to manage binary releases

| Crawl PRs since last merge and create a changelog
| Changelogs are good

| Tweet about the release
| Why creating a changelog if nobody reads it

| Mention it in the next blog post
| Ditto.

| Drink 🍾
| Celebrations are important
|===

==== Recommendation

Do it all.

== Release naming

Some software (e.g. Ubuntu) name their release to make it easier to refer to them.

=== Recommendation

In the case of comit-rs, as we would not want/expect to have too many releases living in the ecosystem at the same time I think this practice would be futile.

== Publishing on crates.io

In the Rust ecosystem, it is possible to publish crates to crates.io (or other repository) to allow other users to finally access those crates (and use them as part of their software).

=== Recommendation

==== cnd & btsieve

cnd & btsieve are binary and hence it is not expected for other developers to add them to their project dependencies.

> Because we intend to provide binary releases, then there would be no added value to publish these crates to crates.io

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because we intend to provide binary releases, there is no added value to publish these crates to crates.io
```
